Uh, warm welcomes to you all.
Uh, thank you very much, uh, coming along, uh, this morning.
Welcome, John. Um, it just says a, a little bit of a, a, a,
a start to this conversation
that clearly we've, uh, got a couple of reports.
One is importantly your one,
but also we have, uh, Tata report with us, uh, as well.
And we are as a committee, 50 K
with regards to discussion.
But, uh, a very good read, take it as read, uh,
and you've got your, your recommendations in John, I'll,
I'll leave it to you how you wish to handle, uh,
presenting the report you've provided to us.
Sokoto. Thank you for asking me along.
Do you know Lindsey well? Uh, Andrew McConnell,
deputy Auditor General, uh, also an officer of Parliament.
So, uh, we, we are here today
and a team of people including Dan n whose team, uh,
produced the report, uh, and, and the team's there.
So we've got everyone in and, good.
I didn't realize we had that many ties in the office.
So, um, uh,
there's obviously the tire supplies being dropped, uh,
for this particular meeting.
I, I would like to say a few things.
I know you've had a chance to read it,
but I just feel like I want
to just express some things in this report that really sure.
Affected me as well. Um, uh,
I think, uh, and I, we've done quite a lot of media,
and this is quite interesting actually,
that there has been such media interest in this.
But I would say this is one of the most important reports
of my term, um, seven years in my term.
Uh, I think for lots of reasons.
Firstly, the accountability, uh, of public
agencies is at the base of this report.
Um, this is a legal compliance issue if you just
take everything else away from it.
Fundamentally, this is the law
and we should be complying with it as public agencies.
There's also a lot of money, uh, 2.7 billion,
and a lot of risk about settlements.
Uh, and taking all that aside,
there's also the constitutional significance
of the treaty settlement process
and the implementation of settlements that have been made.
So for lots of reasons, it's important.
And also when we saw what we saw, um, you know,
it, it just, uh,
you feel like there things need to be done here.
Uh, so I just want to say that the Auditor General
is normally a cold-hearted accountant,
but when I read this, I thought, um, uh, I felt like, uh,
we needed to act on this.
Um, I think the, uh,
the other thing that you would be very conscious of, um,
you know, the treaty settlement process, um, fee
of settlement legislation, uh, historical account apology,
redress, various forms of redress.
But the expectation
that this is about resetting relationships, uh,
I think was really one of the other big things
that came through for me.
Uh, I've been tangentially involved in treaty settlements
for some time as a public servant,
but actually that idea of resetting relationships that was,
you know, cabinet expectations around this,
which have been endured between multiple governments, uh,
what we looked at was eight agencies.
There are about 70% of the commitments that have been made
through treasury settlements, um, uh, including central
and local government agencies
and three particular settlements.
We looked at the, the lens through that,
but we talked to a lot of agencies.
And so the issues in this report,
I think we can say are widespread.
Um, I thought I'd just do two things.
One, just quickly summarize some of the findings,
and then perhaps just a little bit about my
reflections on those findings.
And then, uh, a little bit about call to action.
So if you can bear with me for a few minutes, five minutes,
maybe, uh, what we found, well, there were some good,
there was some good practice we found.
Um, so it's, uh, it's good to be able to say that.
But over the time
that treaty settlements have been in place,
which is now 30 years,
and some of these are 10 years old, right?
These are not done yesterday,
agencies hadn't really got their heads around
what the commitments were,
the complexity of those commitments.
Uh, they need to work across agency sometimes
to deliver on those commitments,
and then, of course, to actually deliver the redress.
So at the basic level, there wasn't enough understanding.
Mm-hmm. The rights of first refusal, we call out,
particularly because that's a major part of redress and,
and, and settling, uh, settling, uh,
and the fact that those systems memorials weren't
necessarily well managed or in place in all cases.
And some properties have been sold
that should have had a right at first refusal when they
found, when Lynn's looked at a number of agencies, a number
of, uh, memorials that needed to be put in place.
I think the weakness of oversight is another real issue.
Um, the support for es, the expectation on es,
the reporting to ministers themselves
and to parliament about progress of seafood
and just old fashioned accountability for non-delivery
that we would expect in legal commitments.
There's already been tens of millions, uh,
paid in compensation for, um, redress
that couldn't be delivered as intended.
And there have been some improvements.
Tara put in place, Hey, UA
and teta, which is the, uh, portal.
So it's not that there hasn't been some action
and attention to this,
but we also point out in the report, they, uh,
there's more work to be done in both those areas.
Uh, particularly one in five commitments are not updated
because they're outside core government.
They're in, um, SOEs, crown Reserve, et cetera.
Uh, if I was to step back a little bit
and talk about my reaction, uh, to this, uh, a few things,
um, if this was tax compliance,
imagine that, you know,
so why is it that tax compliance is really treated this
seriously, but this is equally legislative compliance just
as important, probably more important in many ways, um,
in terms of constitutional significance,
although I don't wanna say tax compliance isn't
important as auditor general.
It's very important. I think the other thing, second
reaction I might have had is this concept of settlement.
And I think when you come at it in a sense, maybe,
and I can talk about that, you kind of think
of a property transaction.
'cause that's where you hear the word settlement,
where you do the business
and then you both go your separate ways.
That's not what these are. These are settlements of wrongs.
They're resetting a relationship.
And the crown, I think, has seen this
after the treaty settlement process as a series
of transactions that needed
to be managed rather than a relationship
that needed to be reset.
These are meant to be durable.
These are called settlements for a reason. Right?
And I think what we've seen here is there is a risk,
and Tara ti has made that point itself.
There's a risk to the durability of settlements
and the goodwill that is built through many, many years
of moving towards a settlement process.
There's a risk to durability.
And that goodwill that's built
through the settlement process by not implementing the
settlements as expected was required.
And my other reaction was just this
tolerance to non-delivery.
Firstly, the lack of visibility of non-delivery,
and then whether explicit
or implicit a tolerance for not delivering.
And that, you know, we can't expect
that this is a legal compliance at the, at a space.
Right? And I think if I was to step back
and think about my children, um, uh,
that this could be a massive opportunity,
but we risk losing it.
We risk losing it by not implementing these settlements,
both in terms of the actual listed redress,
that's clear enough in the settlement process,
but in the reset relationships that comes with.
And so there's a massive opportunity for the country here
that these, this report, I think, points to being risk.
Um, we make some call to action, uh, in here, um,
some recommendations, obviously.
But if I was to, to think about this committee, um,
and to take it a bit out of my emotional response to my, um,
auditor, general cold-hearted response, um, uh,
parliament being fully updated with this.
Now, I know there's a, um, on a report on, uh, on progress,
but as we point out in the report, sometimes
you might see one commitment that hasn't been met,
but that could be the fundamental essence of a settlement,
and it might just count as one.
So, you know, understanding just how complex
and difficult settlements can be.
Talking to the post settlement governance entities,
I think is really, you know,
we've talked through this process.
Um, I think that from what I can gather,
they've read this report
and see that it reflects their concerns.
Every agency had some issue in dealing with a settlement,
implementing a settlement.
Every PSGE has had some sort of issue as well.
So I think hearing from them would round out your
perspectives on this report.
And, uh, land information.
New Zealand clearly has got a big role here
and just being, uh, clear that they're, they're on top
of the rights of first refusal, those sort of things,
memorials, uh,
and then TPK, which of course is now transitioning, uh,
activity from in this space to help public sector deliver.
Uh, and of course, this committee has a footprint across
other committees, and these commitments have
footprints in other committees.
So whether this committee wants to write us
by the committees, pointing out some
of the things you would like them to,
to be focused on as well.
Hmm. So that was kind of my, uh,
factual summary and my emotional reaction to this.
Um, I think it is, as I said at the start, um, up there
with the most important, uh, reports in my team.
Um, look forward to a conversation with you about that.
Thank you very much, John.
And if I may just start, uh, the conversation, uh, I suppose
that the, uh, the situation that we're in today, uh,
you could point to many factors,
and you've pointed to a lot of that there.
One question I have is, is around the resourcing of the work
of mahi that needs to be done on the many fronts
to be on assessment.
And this is, this is not a today, uh, government thing.
This is a, a, a pan, uh, term
pan period of time.
Um, have we underestimated as the government, as
to the resourcing of the post settlement era to be able
to achieve the success that we're aiming for?
So most of this work was looking at a period
before the last budget and the cycle and the economic cycle.
And now, so this is looking at a time, uh,
before that mostly, but it looks now.
Uh, so that's the first point. The second point I would make
on that is coming back to my core here,
these are legal commitments
and they should be a priority for agencies.
And that, I think means more than just simple resourcing.
It means good governance. It means good reporting.
It means transparency when things have gone along,
it means acting on those issues
and trying to deal with it quickly.
So I think if you were looking at an agency
and its prioritization is really the question.
Mm-hmm. And I would've said, this should be a core priority.
And we see things like, um, uh, crown forest lease land,
which they were given five years to,
and I think we mentioned 23,
that this the five year, wouldn't it?
And that's 'cause they started late.
They thought it was simpler than it was. Right.
And that points to governance
and internal, uh, processes inside agency.
So, uh, you know,
it's resource seems a separate question to my mind.
This is about prioritization inside agencies.
So we talked to that prior.
Sorry, I'll, I'll talking to the prioritization, um,
to drive the right incentives.
Um, and organization is driven from the top with regards
to a, a, a chief executive, et cetera.
And you, you talked to that in the recommendation,
but just talk to me a bit more about
what public service needs to do better
to position the mindset of, uh, the, the person at the top
of an organization to deliver,
be incentivized to deliver that.
'cause you talk about, uh, quite rightly, uh, financials
and all this sort of stuff, and
that they're held very tightly accountable to the delivery
of that as an outcome, but not
potentially in this space here.
So I'm, I'm talking about, uh, uh, KPIs.
I'm talking about agreements in place
for employment, all that
sort of stuff. Could you talk to that?
Yeah, I think a couple of thoughts on that I might ask,
um, Leanne also to just add some
comment as well in that space.
Uh, so I think we saw that across public sector agencies.
Was it two chief executives might have had a performance
metric in their performance agreement around, um,
managing the treaty settlement post, um,
settlement processes.
Um, so we think that the Public Service Commission could
turn its mind to, uh, how it wishes
to incentivize performance, uh, in this space.
I think the other question, uh, is that they, you know,
chief executives will have many, many responsibilities
and many capabilities, but wanna make sure they also have
capability in this space.
So some agencies have many thousands of commitments, so
that should be a core capability for that chief executive,
and they should be supportive in delivering that.
So I think that's a couple
of the points we make in the report.
Um, you know, turning the mind to
how you incentivize the system.
But then I think there's a broader question
of the system being accountable.
So what level of transparency do ministers get?
What level of transparency do US
Parliament see in this space?
So I think you've got a few layers in that question.
Um, but yes, I think chief executives
are critical in the space.
They need to make sure they have the capability to do that.
And we suggest the public service have a, have a thinking
that in the, in the recommendations.
But lean, I'm sure there's other things.
No, I I think your comments are, are being on John.
I mean, I think the other thing that we heard
for senior leaders in the, um, in the public sector was
that hadn't necessarily fully appreciated how much
of their role would be needing
to grapple with these kinds of issues.
And I think they didn't necessarily feel like they had, um,
the right level of support around them to deal with
what are quite complex issues.
So there's some commentary in the report,
and I, I think we, um, suggest
that Public Service Commission needs to turn their mind to
how they might be to support chief executives as well.
Brilliant. Open up to others questions.
If I might, maybe a bit of a, um, supplementary,
and thank you very much for the very, um, honest, uh, uh,
feelings that you, you shared.
Um, Mr. Ryan, uh, what I'd like to ask please,
is when we're talking about the, um, the, the something as
as simple as the right of first refusal, can you please, um,
share with us from your, uh, research, how did,
how did so many agencies miss this?
I, I understand we're saying that, that a lot
of them don't know, um, they haven't prioritized.
But how, how is something so crucial being missed,
so missed so often?
That's something that blew me away.
Uh, I'll ask the team to add some detail
to my general comments.
Um, firstly, uh, when I first heard that I had
that same reaction that this seems straightforward,
but actually putting memorials on titles
can be quite complex.
Titles can also change.
And so they need to know that once the title's moved,
where does the right of first refusal, uh, attached to that?
Sometimes settlements apply rights of first refusal
to a whole region or a whole area of the country.
So they need to work through that quite
methodically and quite carefully.
Um, and what we are saying in this report is actually
that's been, um, not enough attention has been put on
that issue and the complexity of that.
So often Lins has to work with another agency,
so they might issue a new title for some reason,
and both agencies need to know that needs a right
or first refusal on it.
Um, so those sorts
of things fell through the cracks sometimes.
But I dunno, there's others with conflict
with more understanding
Anything.
Uh, and I, my name's Ethan McKenzie, um,
I was the audit lead for this piece of work.
Um, the only thing I would add is that, um, in terms
of the reason why, um, agencies have, uh, kind
of mixed understanding of FRS rights
of First Refusal is partly
because, um, the internal records that some agencies keep
of, uh, the titles that that applies to
and, um, how those titles might change over time.
Um, obviously there's complexity there
because there are a lot of titles
that some agencies have to manage.
Um, but those records weren't always, um,
in the most UpToDate fashion,
which is why the memorials can be quite important.
It's an important layer of assurance so that if
for whatever reason the agency doesn't have a complete
record, there is something else on the title itself
that will signal to the agency that an RFR applies.
Um, yeah, that's the only thing I wanted to add,
But you're right, we talked in the report of many hundreds
of those having to be put on over time. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. I'm, uh, I'm mindful that that, uh,
central government agencies, uh, are a key component
of this, but there's others that are outside
and you do talk to that you could you, could you talk
to the challenge of the Crown being able
to have influence over the right outcomes there?
Well, uh, one in five of those commitments that are put
through tricky settlements, uh, applies to non-core Crown.
Some of those are closer to the Crown.
So you do have Crown entities, SOEs, those sorts
of agencies which are in the border crown.
And then you also have local government.
So the complexity is, of course, those various layers
of government and how you might mandate across those.
Um, so I think that's one, uh, area of complexity.
Uh, but the point we make in here is actually they're a
critical part of the overall settlement process.
And so making, making transparent the status
of those is equally as important.
And we just say that, um, you know, uh,
TPK should turn its mind to
how we expand the reporting across all those,
um, different entities.
Um, there might be other that can talk about it,
but it's generally the layers of, um, authority
that you've got at central government.
Yeah. 'cause I'm, I'm mindful that settlements are
between Maori and the Crown.
Mm. And, uh, it, it'll be easy for the Crown to just say,
well, these other entities, I know what they have
to do, they should work.
But I, I don't think it should be left to
that simple outcome.
I think it needs to be more ownership by the crown of
what they're actually doing to complete.
I think you making exactly the point we hear from the post
settlement government entities, they,
these are sometimes really small organizations dealing
with this massive crown,
and the Crown has done this big settlement.
You know, we've been in parliament, we've got the law,
and then it fractures into all the
agencies that are delivering it.
And it's very hard
for those ps those post settlement governance entities
to actually get this picture across it all.
Teta is helping that, that portal,
but it doesn't include all the status, uh, updates.
And so Absolutely. Right.
One of the things we had time
and again, was it shouldn't be us connecting the crown up.
The crown should be connecting itself back up. Yeah.
Hannah, were you supplementary to that? Okay.
Yeah. Uh, thank you. Um, fantastic piece of work.
Thank you very much. My question, uh, is a supplemental
to Davids and really, um, is asking the question about how
the operational delivery of that on the frontline.
So some of those, uh, crown agencies who have, uh,
partnership agreements and they're signed, you know,
here in Wellington, um, and then they're operationalized.
And the tension between the frontline delivery of agencies
and post settlement governments entities, uh,
sometimes is difficult.
'cause sometimes the frontline workers, they don't,
don't understand they have the agreement.
So how, how is that able to be? Was that an issue?
Did that come through from the, um, PSGs?
I think one of the things we say in the report, and Ethan
or Liam might add to it, is, um,
agencies actually understanding their
commitments fundamentally.
Mm-hmm. And then governing them, like they are a commitment,
you know, governing them and, and, and their leadership team
and through the organization.
So they've line out behind what their commitments are.
And I think that was, that's kind of one
of the key recommendations.
And he, the chief executives for the commitments
to actually govern them well, which then does give you
that slow down Yeah.
End to end, um, commitment inside the agency. I don't know.
Well, I was just gonna add to that, I think in,
in addition, thinking about the settlement is a whole thing.
So agencies that have individual commitments,
having an awareness of what commitments other agencies have
and, and doing some work to coordinate with one another
to make it a bit easier for post settlement
governance entities to engage.
Um, you know, uh, Ethan, um,
we talked in the report a bit about sometimes a post
settlement governance entity is telling one agency
what another agency has done wrong,
and there didn't seem
to be awareness of that all of the time.
So, you know, those things just make it, I think,
very difficult to build good, strong relationships
that can give post settlement government entities confidence
that the, that, that the Crown
is doing what it needs to be doing.
Mm-hmm. Ethan, I dunno if you want to add,
Uh, no.
Okay.
Tim, um, just wanna to you for,
uh, this report and the mahi that's gone into this.
I think last year I was, um, consistently talking about
what does this look like for post settlement entities
and Iwi.
Um, and so it's the first one done in, you know,
we are 30 years down the track,
so I just wanted my heat to that.
Um, I've got so many
questions You might need your own session.
Yeah. One of mind actually, seriously.
Um, but, uh, please apologize for my broad
and then super detailed questions,
but, um, I've got a few questions here.
Um, don't really know where to start,
but basically, um, this
whole idea of once all iwis are settled, what does
that look like for New Zealand
and what does that look like for, uh,
the Crown engaging with Iwi?
And, you know, without this, within this whole report,
it's kind of like everyone just kind
of splits away when really that's not the, that's not the,
it's about an ongoing relationship.
And how does that look? That's very broad,
but, um, yeah, what are your, the
Million Dollar question? Well,
you know, I probably a little bit
outside the scope of the report.
Yeah. But some, some thoughts from the report.
One would be, um, this idea of resetting relationships
inside as a consequence of the treaty settlement process.
Uh, and what we're saying here,
is it really unfair agencies what that means?
Yeah. Like they can't really do what they don't understand.
Understand. And so what we are saying in here is
that TPK could actually lead a piece of work in that space
that actually said, this is what it should look like.
Yeah. In the future. This is kind of the relationship
and how it should feel when you're looking
in at the public at the crown.
Uh, and I think, I think that would be a really helpful
conversation to have in the public sector as well.
Absolutely. You know, to just get their heads around that
and it would raise the profile
of the joint jointness of the crown again.
So I think, I think you're right.
I think that's exactly, um, a question that sits
outside when people look back in
and say, well, what does this reset look like?
Yeah. So TPK we say in here could actually, um,
hopefully facilitate that conversation. Yeah.
And just to up on that, um,
just recently we've been going around to different, uh, PhDs
and, and, um,
for example, you've got the wa t settlement,
and then within that there's the Waikato River Authority.
And then within that there's the tu Mana
and they're talking with different, uh, councils.
Um, they found it very difficult to grasp onto what
is, how can they get support?
And it's can be quite complex for them.
And they, I don't think,
it's not their fault, absolutely not.
But what support can we give to them to understand how
important legislation like is
and the great cost of not understanding those mechanisms.
I'm sure others, others have got views on that.
I, I'm not sure we, we talk about some
of the council relationships we saw.
Yeah. Uh, we saw what worked well in one case
and what was a little bit problematic in another.
Yeah. Uh,
and, um, one of the things we try
and do through this is amplify good
practice as well, where we see it.
So we will be doing some work in that space, um, just
to talk to councils about what we saw.
Um, yeah. Good.
Look, I think this report sends us in
so many different directions when we look at
the things that aren't quite right.
But I don't know if others wanted to.
Well, I think councils, we,
we definitely heard from councils through the work that,
you know, they, the men
that they didn't necessarily get the same support.
This wasn't able to provide them with the kind of support
that they had been providing to central government agencies.
So I think they're aware of that.
Um, Ethan, you might have some specific
No, that was what I was gonna say is that the,
the councils we spoke to, um, especially on the how
to interpret the settlement side, felt like they, um,
didn't get the same level of support
and what they just couldn't get the same level of support
as they as public
organizations and the central government do.
Um, and that's one of the areas
where we've got a recommendation to suggest
that the same level of support
that central government gets should be extended in some way
to local government
and crown entities as well that also fall
outside of that group.
Yeah. And one more, sorry, just around, um,
making the public sector's job a little bit more easier.
I think there's just a long range of timelines
between different iwis who are 30 years down the track
and who haven't, which you say that having a cohesive
of different iwis who can kind of outline this is
where we are, these are our challenges, these are what have,
this is what has worked for our iwi outside
of a national iwi chairs forum will be helpful.
Now you're putting me in really great.
Can I pass on a Question?
Look, I think, I think the more
that the public sector understands
and sees the issues,
the better it is. That's probably what I would say.
And the more that they can
share practice with one another.
Yeah. Yeah. So that's something we talk about in the report.
We think there's, you know, there is 30 years
of experience out here.
Yeah, for sure. That they can hopefully
find ways to share that with
Help each other. Yeah. Can
We move to Adrian for a quick, um, my question is about
did you find any, or did the, um,
PS sgs mentioned, um, any lost opportunities
because of delays?
For example, if you had a delay in transferring a piece
of forest land, um,
and they wanted to sell that piece of land to get a,
a better piece of land.
Um, yeah. Did they mention anything? Yeah,
There's one story in there and I'll just ask Ethan
or Leanne just to reflect the story
because it was very much in that space. Yeah,
Yeah. Um, so
we heard, um, an example of, uh,
the Crown forestry license land, um, Riverhead Forest,
which is just north of Auckland, so in RO here.
Um, and um, long story short, um,
that title was meant to transfer
to Te Amma within a five year timeframe.
And it wasn't. And, um, Teko, Amma, uh,
engaged lens about that.
And essentially the two, um, organizations kind of came to
an agreement about, um, how to recognize that failure.
And part of that, uh, agreement was recognition
of the lost opportunity to cover on Maki.
Um, and they'll be better placed to explain
what the lost opportunity was specifically.
But at a high level it was, um, lost commercial opportunity.
Um, as I understand it, they wanted to develop some parts
of the forest that had been cleared,
and the fact
that they didn't have title was problematic in
that space. Um,
Because if you get a piece of land that's at the end
of it's third rotation
and, um, not viable to plant again,
you want to do something else.
Yeah. I think that, Uh, uh, did they
talk about why it takes five years?
Mm-hmm. Always puzzled me. Why, why it takes that long.
So the five year timeframe, um,
the five year timeframe was set by, um,
kind of an early settlements
that involved crown forestry license land,
and that five year timeframe was to recognize the complexity
of transferring some of that land.
So, um, multiple easements, that sort of thing. Yeah.
So sometimes, um,
a single crown forestry license land block will need
to be split between several different pgs
and surveying the land forest for a long time.
It can be quite complex to do that.
They're very large blocks. Um,
there are some other technical aspects to that, um,
which we write in the report.
Um, so it was to acknowledge that it was also
a five-year timeframe
to recognize any unexpected complications.
Um, so stuff that might've been outside of lenses control
that complicated the transfer.
And that can include things like easement.
So if PSG wants access to the block over another block,
that can be something that links to foresee,
but that needs to be sorted
before the title can be transferred.
Um, and essentially, uh, there was also a kind of unknown
unknowns part of it, which was, well,
we needed an extra buffer on top of that to make sure
that if anything really serious goes wrong,
that we could not possibly have predicted
that we've got enough time before the statutory obligation
timeframe kind of, um, lessons.
Um, and all of those issues
in various ways have impacted the, the forest land
that we understand has been transferred beyond
that five year timeframe.
But the other commonality in all those examples is
that Lynn's, um, Lynn started the process too late.
They treated the five year timeframe as this is
how much time we've got, as opposed to we need
to start off day one Right.
And make sure that we get it done as quickly as possible.
Because once the five years run out,
that's problematic for us. And
They acknowledged that, yeah,
They've acknowledged that now
and they've changed their processes, um,
to kind of learn from that.
And they now have a, yeah, a different approach
to transferring CFLs that, um, that means, in fact, um,
in more recent years, they've transferred
CFLs quite quickly.
Um,
The rental income comes across that, isn't it?
One other question is, uh, around relativity.
So, um, in claims, yeah,
it's an important component, um,
and realistically couldn't, um, compare the relativity
of a 2025 claim with a, um,
a 30-year-old planner.
But that's what the process is. Um, did anyone raise that?
'cause not all claims are equal.
You know, you, you've got some settlements
that have government interaction at a
ministerial level every year.
And so they have the opportunity to discuss, um, the issues
of, um, um, you know,
settlement mechanisms not being delivered.
Um, but not every settlement has those. Mm-hmm.
That's right. Did that come up
Well, one of the issues that we also point out is, um,
things like intro letters of introduction
and some of the relationship agreements were actually
things that hadn't been delivered.
So actually, um, that came up through the sort of aspects
of non-delivery you like,
rather than necessarily the benefits
of having those in place, but just not being put in place
was one of the issues that we might like.
Yeah. But, but other than that, though, we didn't, um,
comment on, or it's outside of our mandate, I guess, to, to
assess differences in settlements
and kind of any innovations that would've happened
between settlements from 10 years ago and today.
One thing that we, we do point out is that, um,
the complexity for organizations has
increased since the first settlement was settled.
So that's not just
because of the number of commitments increasing.
Um, so, you know, the more you have to do,
the more complex the, the task becomes.
But also because, um,
and I think this goes to your question, um, also
because, uh, some commitments are unique
and have been innovated kind of for that settlement,
um, for the first time.
Um, which means that agencies have to kind of,
or should consider changing their way of working to kind
of accommodate that new type of commitment.
Well, one is the, uh, right of first refusal.
Um, they used to be 50 years,
then the two ho settlement came along.
It was a 170 years.
Um, that means everyone
before then didn't have the same opportunity.
So how can they be relative?
So, um, you know, I, I can well imagine at the end
of this whole process, uh,
and the office might have a role to play in that is, is
to actually look at those things.
'cause those are easily, um, identifiable, you know,
some of them more so than others.
But, um, you, you, you can't say that a, a settlement entity
that has 170 plus years is, is relative to,
uh, earlier settlement.
That only is 50 years.
Probably not our mandate to look at.
But, um, clearly negotiated through a settlement processes
as, you know, we looked at it once the negotiations
have completed.
I, I would make that point though, that, um,
settlements don't come outta the blue right there, there,
there's months, years of work to get there.
And so even though Ethan makes the
point, they can be complex.
There's plenty of time for the public sector to understand
there should be plenty of time
and to then be paid to implement them. So
There, and often those, um,
organizations are involved
in the settlement process themselves.
So it's about that point.
Yeah. And there are a lot of commitment types
that are similar.
So the terms and conditions for RFIs can vary quite a lot,
but the basic principle of them has been the
same for a very long time.
Um, and so yeah, quantity is a factor,
but understanding how
to execute them should be that difficult.
And something very simple.
The leaders of introduction point that John made, I mean,
we saw examples of that stuff,
which on a level feels quite straightforward, but,
but not being implemented for some time.
So yeah.
So I just, uh, again, there might be other questions
that's come forward, but, um, just a generalization,
very good rapport, um, of what it is.
But more importantly is, uh, what role do we play
is Maori's, uh, uh, committee in the future of this?
And does the office have a view by that
Point? Uh,
well, I always rate Parliament
as been extraordinarily important,
and particularly holding the public sector to account
around its performance.
Uh, I think at the moment you probably don't get enough
visibility of the issues
or challenges that agencies are facing.
And I think you probably, uh, we say in here,
there should be better reporting to you.
And obviously there's the Tara Fitty, um, report,
but we think there could be much richer reporting.
Uh, as I said earlier,
treaty settlements are not just unique to this committee.
They are education, you know, they've all got, uh,
large numbers of commitments.
Uh, other committees should also be considering how they ask
and inquire, um, which
Is potentially something that we could write
to other committees to do just that.
Yeah, highlight that fact that there are large numbers
of commitments in various other agencies.
And as part of annual views
and estimates, inquiries, um, having a look at
how those agencies are performing
and are they, have they taken on board, um, some
of the recommendations here around governance
and understanding their commitments.
So I think that would be one way you
to multiply your impact.
I think the other is to consider what level
of reporting you would like, uh, presumably
through TPK, uh, now.
Uh, and then, um, from this report in particular,
I think it would be helpful
to have land information New Zealand come
and talk about its transfer processes
and be given assurance that they are on track with those.
Uh, and I know at some point you're looking
to get maybe the public Service commissioner here
and talk about the accountability arrangements as well.
So I think you can do a number of interventions,
but others have been in the detail of this for longer.
So I just check whether there's anything else.
I, I think it would be good to offer an opportunity
to post settlement governance entities to come
and tell their story, but I think that, um, uh, uh,
would probably welcome an opportunity to come and talk.
They've recently inherited some new functions,
so they'll be getting their head around how it's planned
and how it wants to operate going forward.
But, you know, talking to them about
what the plan is would be a really good Well, and
I think the other thing they would probably say if they
were here would be, this has been a long time
in the making these issues.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and so, you know, they have just inherited this.
I think if you can give them as much momentum as possible
to keep it moving would be great.
'cause um, you know,
they need support in some of their role as well.
Mm-hmm. From Parliament. What
About on, I mentioned in one
of my earlier questions about the likes
of local government and the likes.
What's, what, what, what do you would you recommend in this
Space?
I don't know if I can answer that specifically,
but local government has a big role in some
of these settlements, and in particularly the long term
relationships around land and,
and, um, resource management, et cetera.
Uh, we've done a number of reports, uh, into various aspects
of touch on this, including, uh, the ability of councils
to form strategic relationships with iwi in that area.
And the, and the importance of that.
Uh, I think you could call large councils in
that have got responsibilities.
We pop, we looked at Auckland, uh,
and Bay Plenty in Hawkes Bay,
I think in here in Wellington Regional Council.
Yeah. So they're quite legitimate
to have a conversation with them.
We see some good practice in some of those councils,
which we could all learn from and,
and some things they could improve and Great.
Any other thoughts from members? Yeah,
Just, uh, mahi, uh, KO
or, um, just what be keen to,
while we've got you here just to hear, um, some, your, um,
more, more candid contemporary thoughts on, um, um, TETA
that if Teta didn't exist, that would be the thing
that I would imagine we'd be recommending be
established as quickly as possible.
Uh, and I was pleased through the report
that you obviously do have confidence in it,
you both in here and today, you've spoken, uh, to
what your recommendation to, to Puni would be around that.
And just even the last five minutes
with the chair's question.
Um, what I, when when we get TPK,
and that's where I'm, um, I'm keen to push them on that,
including the much earlier question
of do they need more resourcing?
But just, yeah. Given the fact this will probably be the
last time we hear you on that.
Um, further thoughts around, um, iha perhaps beginning with,
do you have confidence that the,
essentially the framework's been set up is,
is, is fit for purpose?
If we, we resource it properly?
There some subtlety to the answer,
but I'll give a top line answer
and then I'll turn to my right hand by the sound of it
to go through some detail.
So I agree with you completely.
Hey, Ana
and TE have been really good steps forward, um, in terms
of ta Hey Arthur, um, a couple of issues.
One, it lists all the actual directions
from a treaty settlement.
Mm-hmm. But the status is only core gum.
So one and five are not in there.
And that's a really big problem. Right.
Uh, is the first thing you'd want to fix.
I think, uh, the second, which is a bigger issue,
is just understanding, uh, I think within that,
the scale of some of the problems.
So making sure that they reflect a relatively simple thing.
For example, a letter of introduction
for a museum in your work versus
a major piece of settlement.
You know, can we really unpick that, uh,
access has now been given
to post settlement governance entity.
So they get some way of seeing the crown as a whole,
but the complexity between them is, is not there.
And then I think that's a package between the
ANA and, and the, and the portal
and TETA to support local government
as well in the space and non crown.
But the first thing would be get
status for everybody in there.
Right. That would be my first call reaction. Mm-hmm.
But even if delved into it much more than I,
Uh, yeah.
Um, first of all, to reinforce John's points,
um, the fact that TETA exists is a really important step.
It's, um, created a kind of baseline for, um,
then TETA 15 now TBK, to sort
of assess agencies performances, um, core crown agencies.
That is, um, other than the significant points
that John's highlighted, um, there are some things that,
um, on balance should be considered sort of part
of the settlement that are written in the settlement act
that aren't listed to hia.
So to hire to list things that are kind of affirmative, uh,
actions on public org.
So where they're told to do something, you will must,
shall do something that's listed, but, um, some stuff isn't.
So, um, the example we put in the report is, um,
if there is, uh, an agreement which is being worked on
and has been worked on
before negotiations, for example, sometimes a deed
of settlement and a settlement ledge might just say,
we acknowledge that these, this agency
and the iwi is working on this agreement.
Mm-hmm. And it's to include these things, um,
because that doesn't have that, um, kind of positive, um,
will, must, shall in there construction.
It, uh, it's not listened to hire as an agreement
that should be tracked as a commitment.
Um, so there are things like that, that means
that teta is not entirely complete.
Um, the other thing that it, uh,
has limited information on is the status
of relationship agreements.
So sometimes the way
that a relationship agreement is included in a deed
of settlement means that the action item for an agency
to complete is to sign the relationship agreement.
And if they've done that, um, they often mark it as on track
because they recognize that that's an ongoing commitment.
But we didn't see consistently
agencies using say the kind of, um,
pre-entry comment box into how I said to explain, yes,
this agreement is meeting regularly.
Yes, it is achieving the goals that sort of set out in it.
Um, the health of the relationship is good, bad, going
through some rough patches.
Um, and so relationship agreements are just as important
as major commercial, um, transfers.
We suggest in the report that including that kind
of information would be important
because that goes to the durability of settlements
and the risks that we talk
about that are kind of not visible. Um,
Just before you jump off that one relationship
is, is, is two parties.
Mm-hmm. Um, so how do you give effect to a decent, uh,
qu well not perhaps not quantitative measure of that?
Are you suggesting a paragraph from each
of the relationship parties of where they feel like,
how do you measure the quality of the relationship? It's
A, I think it's a really good question.
I think, um, one of the other points that Ethan,
you might have been about to come to was, uh,
the tower 50 was,
and I suppose to k going forward, um,
does some verification,
but largely it's self-reported stated.
So in the case of a relationship agreement, it would be
what the, uh,
crown Agency is responsible would be responsible
for providing that status update.
Now is Ethan, um,
and John have already pointed out, uh,
postman governance entities now do also have access to Tata,
but I think there's some work to do to think about how, um,
status of those types of things is reported. But even,
Yeah, and, and the other thing I guess I'd point out with
that, um, verification thing is that, um,
I think our view would be that you, you'd want to calibrate
that quite carefully so that the honest sub doesn't kind
of transfer to the PSG to verify whether
a public order has delivered something.
That's right. Um, so there's a little bit of subtlety about
that, but certainly for relationship agreements, I think
that how you do it, the level of detail you need
to go into is kind of up for discussion.
At the very least, a kind of
basic status update about whether the relationship
agreement, both parties feel like it's going well,
that you don't need much more detail
than that at a system level. Um,
The core purpose of the measure is to see
that there is a relationship to the entities.
That's, that's the purpose of it. Mm-hmm.
And I think as long as you're meeting that end,
you're achieving your purpose
of the measure, is probably what I'm saying. Yeah,
Definitely.
Sorry, Hannah, Um, this is going back to, uh, the,
were saying before that there was an appetite to invite pgs.
Just touching on that a little bit
more into the select committee.
Did you think that would be a good idea for us to inquire?
Well, I think it's, um, over to the committee,
but I Yeah, yeah, certainly.
Um, you know, it might be an opportunity for them to you
to talk to them directly about their experiences
That their, um, the work that we did
with those PSGs was crucial to the report.
Um, the reports focus is on the performance
of public organizations.
So, um, you'll get, I imagine a much broader kind
of view from talking to them directly.
Anything else from members of the committee?
Um, just one more thing for you
since we've got a bit of time.
Um, just reflecting on the, um,
when we were mentioning earlier the risks to the, um,
durability of settlements
and, um, I also read in the report the, um, the concern
and expressed by as well that, um, financial compensations
to compensation to some post settlement governance entities,
um, because of the significant settlement issues, um,
in some cases could outstrip the value of financial
and commercial redress contained in their settlements.
That's really alarming as well.
And so, um, and so with respect to, to the,
um, the work that you've done, I know that you touched, um,
earlier on this.
Can you give us some more insight into that?
And, and, um,
and yeah, we are to, I obviously we've got the
recommendations, just some more insight into that.
Uh, so we, uh, got information from Tara
on settlement, uh, redress that hadn't been delivered
and the consequences of that, um, in the way it was intended
or, or delivered at all.
And I think we talk about tens of millions
or something, uh, in there
that has been paid in compensation for a settlement
that wasn't delivered in the way it was meant
to be delivered or, or not delivered in time or something.
I, I think the bigger issue though on the durability is
about, um, this, the Crown
actually implementing these as intended, uh,
being honest about status of them reporting that being held
to account for it, just doing
what it said it would do through the settlement process.
And I think that's, it's not so much the money,
I think it's the intent of what these were there
to do, reset relationships.
And I think and focusing on that
and getting that right, I think you won't suffer
a durability question.
Um, but at the moment we can't see that.
That's, yeah. That's where it should be.
The quality of information's really important for, um,
public organizations for ministers to understand the risks.
And without that information, you know,
how would they know what the risk is?
I think that's the main point
that we make in the, in the report.
It just, uh, it brings me to reflect on the fact that we,
we have, um, uh, people that represent the crown
and negotiations that daily basis for a long time
they almost become emotionally tied to
what the settlement is all about.
But then post settlement, that group
of people move on to the next one.
And then there's a whole fresh one
that actually doesn't have any of that history of
what this is the relationship that's been formed in that.
Now I do sort of, it's, I reflect on,
I'm making a statement more than a question.
You reflect on the fact that
that's potentially part of the problem
Falls off the cliff. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Well I think
that's an interesting observation
because I think what the public sector does
and once the settlement's been reached is it looks like a
series of tasks Yeah.
To deliver rather than the bigger intent that's behind it.
'cause you say there's people that go
through the settlement process going,
I hate using the phrase, but go on a journey to get
to the point of settlement, uh, legislation, deed
of settlement, and then the public sector picks
that up in various agencies rather than takes that intent
that was formed here mm-hmm.
Yeah. And puts it in place over here. Mm-hmm.
I think that's probably fair. Yeah.
And, and the, um, that same shift of personnel
who might have worked on the negotiation, um,
on the public organization side sometimes,
but often, um, that doesn't happen on the PSG side.
So the continuity of the people
who were involved in the negotiation
and then are receiving redress and managing it is the same.
And they, you know, the PSGs that we talked to spoke
to this point and emphasized it quite a lot, which is that
they have a full understanding of
what the settlement is about and
the reason why it was reached.
Yep. And often the people that they talk to are new faces
who don't, and they have to re-explain
the significance of the settlement to them.
Um, and they also invoked that, um, when they were talking
to us about, um, their expectation
that crown agencies be coordinated falls out
of settlement negotiations where, um, we didn't audit this,
but as a description, settlement negotiations
are a whole of Crown effort.
And PSGs we spoke to saw that
as a quite well coordinated effort and well resourced.
And they didn't, they felt that that fell away
after the settle was reached.
Yep. Understand. Well, um, I think we've exhausted our,
our questions and it's, and it's been a great interaction
and I do appreciate you coming before us
and spending time with us to, uh, better understand, uh,
some of the context and, and well done to the authors
and the people that have put all the work into this
is a valuable piece of work.
And I acknowledge that you, what you said at,
at the beginning there, um, fact
that this could potentially be one of the most important,
uh, reports written in your time here.
Um, so thank you for bringing this to us,
and it won't come as a surprise
that this is often important, uh, a matter,
an important matter to this, this committee.
And we will be definitely proactive in seeing what we can,
uh, effect and better outcomes of, of what this,
the challenges that are presented in this.
And just in closing, John with you,
uh, retiring from the role mm-hmm.
Not too far away. Um,
we probably won't get another opportunity,
but on behalf of, of this committee, thank you very much
for your work that you do in the important role, one
of the three independent officers
that we have here in our country, and, uh, what you do here.
And I can also tell you that Lindsay does a great job
of interactions with us here.
But John, I wish you well with, uh oh, thank you.
Your, your future and that, and,
and on behalf once again, thank you very much, Kia. Thank
You very much. Thank you. Very
Interest. Thank you very
Thank you.
All the best. Thank you.